Oh I thank you very much,
all of you, for coming.
Mayor of Cincinnati
has declared today
as "Shri Mataji Day" in Cincinnati.
And I will read this proclamation
which I am very thrilled about because,
somebody would know that
Shri Mataji is an international figure.
She is a diplomat.
Her husband has been the Secretary General
of a very large United Nations
organization.
He has been knighted by the Queen of England.
He has received the highest awards
from many, many nations
and he is
one of the living legends in the world today.
His name is Sir C.P. Shrivastava
and Shri Mataji, herself,
has been honored, all over the world.
And it's my pleasure to read this proclamation.
It says: "We proclaim
whereas
Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, "The Mother,"
is recognized internationally
as the most significant spiritual force
in the world today.
And she will awaken in us
the force that will change our lives
and that change the world.
And whereas,
The United Nations honor her
with a U.N. Peace Medal.
And whereas, Shri Mataji has developed
A simple meditation technique,
"Sahaja Yoga"
which enables the en masse
experience of self-realization.
Breakthrough of the new awareness.
And whereas,
Sahaja Yoga
is the next evolutionary step
for humanity
which can bring the transformation
of human consciousness
to a higher level.
And whereas, the city of Cincinnati,
is honored
by the visit of Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi
who will introduce through Sahaja Yoga
the experience of harmonious well-being,
and inner transformation
that can lead us out of the confusion and frustration
of modern living
and spark the greatest inner transformation yet seen.
Now therefore,
I, Dwight Tillery, mayor of the City of Cincinnati
do hereby proclaim Thursday, September 10th, 1992,
as "Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi Day,"
in Cincinnati.
I bow to all the seekers of truth.
At the very outset
we have to know
that truth is what it is.
We cannot change it.
We cannot
conceptualize it.
Unfortunately, at this human level,
we cannot feel it.
We have to become
something more.
Unless and until
that happens to us
we cannot know the truth.
The absolute truth.
I call you all as seekers of truth.
And if you are seekers of truth,
you have to open your mind like scientists
and treat
whatever I'm telling you as a hypothesis.
And if it works, you should accept
and grow in it.
You have been already told, I think, about
the subtle system
that is built in within us.
This system has been built in
during our evolutionary process.
Whatever is the truth has to be tangible.
It should not be accepted blindfolded
because I am telling you.
You have to verify yourself that whatever
I'm telling you is the truth
because you will have the actualization
of the experience of the truth.
That is,
firstly,
that you are not this body, this mind,
this ego, conditionings,
but you are the pure spirit.
This is the first truth about yourself.
And the second one is that
there is an all pervading
power of divine love,
which they call by different names.
They may call it "Rūḥ."
They may call it "God's Divine Love."
They may call it the Holy, the
"Cool breeze of the Holy Spirit."
They may call it "Paramchaitanya."
Call it by any name.
But that is such a subtle
force energy which exists,
which does all the living work.
Here now you see flowers.
Flowers, so beautiful
and we take them for granted.
You don't question
how this miracle has taken place.
Look at your eyes.
We don't question how this camera
has come to exist.
Look at your brain - what a computer it is.
You never question it
how it has come to us,
how we have become human beings
and how all these things are
working within us automatically.
If you ask who runs our heart,
the doctors would say
it's an autonomous system.
But if you go further and ask who is this "auto"?
Who is running this heart?
There are so many questions
which cannot be answered by science,
and science is not conclusive.
Recently, I was reading a book,
"The Limits of Science,"
and he has asked
three questions in that book:
"How do I come to be a human being?"
It's the first question.
Second is: "What is the purpose of my life?"
And (third): "Why should I live any longer?"
All these three questions
can be very easily answered
once you become the spirit.
This transformation is also called
by many names.
People call it "self-realization."
Some call it "selfhood."
Some say "self-knowledge."
But what is this "self"
they are talking about and
what will happen if we get the "selfhood"?
I have to tell you, that all of you
have got your divinity within yourself.
And surprisingly, it is absolutely intact.
Whatever you might have done,
whatever mistakes
you might have committed,
your divinity is absolutely intact.
It is not at all disturbed, cannot be perished,
cannot be perished, cannot be destroyed
by anything.
The reason is:
This Divinity is eternal,
and whatever is eternal cannot be harmed.
Nobody can destroy it.
And that is within you there.
And sometimes the glimpse of that
may be that
you think whatever you see,
there must be something beyond.
And when you start thinking that,
then you become
a seeker of truth.
Surprising, in these modern times,
there are so many,
so many seekers of truth
and so many are lost.
When we start seeking truth,
we definitely have to put faith into something.
When we put our faith into religion also,
what do we find that religion is
power oriented or money oriented.
So there is fundamentalism.
Whatever attitude people might have taken
those who started this religion
are immaculate people, they are divine people
and they were like the flowers
on one tree of spirituality.
Only we have plucked these flowers
and we are fighting.
How can we fight in the name of God?
One should reason it out and once you reason it out,
you start thinking:
"There must be something more to it."
So when this..
residual force, we call it as "Kundalini" in India.
Kundalini means coils,
starts rising,
it passes through six centers
and pierces through the seventh one,
Which we call as "Brahmarandra"
on the fontanel bone area,
which was a soft bone in your childhood.
And this opens.
It is the actualization of your baptism.
It is not just I put my hand on
your head and say: "Now you are baptized."
This kind of self-certificate
is not going to help us.
Now, if you become..
say, the governor of this place,
then you have certain powers.
Now, if you become the self
or if you become the self realized soul,
then you must have some powers.
And..
people, normally,
certify themselves as this and that.
This is not the way
you can achieve that state.
You have to be honest,
because if you are honest seekers,
then you should expect
the actualization of the experience,
first thing, about which Thomas
has written in his treatise.
I wish you could read the Gospel
of Thomas, in which he has clearly said
that the experience of self-realization
is the most important thing,
and that it's to be achieved.
You must be knowing Thomas ran away,
because I think Paul
was trying to dominate him
or whatever it was,
and ultimately he went to India.
But before going there, he went to Egypt
and he put all his treatise in a jar.
For 50 years
they have been trying to put it in
common language.
And now the book is out, partly.
So, this experience..
has to be there, that you feel your spirit
and feel this all pervading power
all around us.
So far, you have not felt it.
So we have to be
humble about it.
As Christ has said, meek in heart
will inherit the earth.
That's a fact.
You have to be meek about it that
so far we have not found the truth
and that this divinity is within us,
which is going to connect us to that
all pervading power by which
we are going to know the truth.
Apart from
many other
benefits that
you get by the awakening of this force within you.
One, your physical
conditions improve.
Once you come to Sahaja Yoga,
you are amazed
how your diseases are improved.
Here in Cincinnati,
one lady who was suffering from cancer
got cured.
But curing people is a funny job.
Once you cure them, they just disappear.
They're very happy, they write to you:
"Thank you very much, you cured us."
But they're not the ones
who give light to others.
Secondly,
mentally, people improve very much.
All the habits
which are destructive,
which we have acquired
in anyway.
They disappear and disappear
so fast,
that I have known people in England
that overnight
they gave up drugs, overnight.
Today they are beautiful people,
professionals, working very well.
This, I'm telling you
in the year 1970 was happening
in England.
Or say '74, especially,
in a big group, it happened.
Then,
the second advantage is that
that you find your own spirit.
Your spirit shines in your attention.
Thus your attention becomes active.
Like the light.
Now there is a light here.
When it falls on something
you can see it clearly,
but it doesn't act on that.
Maybe a little bit,
it might, sort of spoil it,
but it doesn't act.
But when your attention
is enlightened,
then wherever you put your attention, it acts
that means on your hands also,
you find this cool breeze blowing,
and the fingertips,
which are the sympathetic nervous endings,
become enlightened.
So five, six and seven.
These centers on the left and the seven
centers on the right get enlightened
and you immediately know
what's wrong with you.
And also you can find out
what's wrong with others.
So, what has happened to your attention is that
you have got a new awareness
where you become collectively conscious.
Who is the other?
When the microcosm becomes the macrocosm,
when a drop becomes the ocean,
it becomes the ocean.
In the same way, you start feeling
the problems of other people,
and you talk the language of centers.
If you know how
to cure your centers
and the centers of others,
imagine what miracles you can do.
If you see the problems of human beings,
we can say ecological problems,
health problems, all kinds of problems
we have.
These are due
to fundamentally human beings
and due to fundamentally, their centers.
If you can put these centers right,
you can put human beings right
as well as you can put all the problems
completely solved.
Like,
I would like to tell you that in India,
there are three doctors in Delhi
university who have got their M.D.
Master of,
they call it the, in the medical, as the MBBS.
Now they have doctorate in medicine.
In the curing, about the curing of
very incurable diseases,
no doubt in Sahaja Yoga
many incurable diseases have been cured,
even blood cancer
and all that has been cured.
But at the very outset,
I would like to tell you,
we are not here to cure people,
but to make you all into doctors
so that all of you can go around and cure.
Because, single handed,
how many people I can cure?
So it's important that you all should achieve
your power of the spirit
by which you can enlighten
the whole world.
It's like one candle which is enlightened
can enlighten another..
candle very easily.
But surprisingly, people say:
"But we can enlighten ourselves."
How can a candle,
which is not enlightened, can enlighten itself?
It's illogical.
But anybody who gets enlightenment,
anyone of you
who gets enlightenment
can enlighten another person,
because you can raise the Kundalini of others.
You can give realization to others.
You get these powers automatically within you.
For which of course,
I hope Bala has told you, you cannot pay.
You cannot pay
because it's a living process of evolution.
How much did we pay
to become human beings?
Or how much do we pay to this Mother Earth
for giving us these flowers?
I mean, there's a built-in quality
in the Mother Earth that she can sprout,
and these plants also have a built-in
capacity to produce flowers
or a seed to become a plant.
All living process is done
without going to the bank,
without knowing about money.
This is the first thing you must
understand that you cannot pay for it.
It is so invaluable
that you can't pay for it.
It is so vital.
That it has to happen,
especially now the time has come.
I call it as the "Blossom Time."
Some people say, it's the "Last Judgment."
In Quran, it is written
it's a "qiyāmah," when your hands will speak.
All these, or also there is "Aquarius Age,"
"Age of Enlightenment,"
people talk of so many things.
But it's talk, talk, talk.
It's just a lip service.
It has to happen, this has to be actualized.
Otherwise, you should not accept somebody
who is just giving a big sermon
and collecting money after that.
It is..
the experience that you all should have
and the powers that are bestowed by that.
As I told you,
when the spirit shines in your attention,
you become enlightened
and your attention becomes enlightened
and effective.
You start feeling another person,
his centers on your fingertips
and also the centers that are your own.
That self-knowledge, you feel it on your fingertips.
Now the second quality of the spirithood is this:
that you know the absolute truth.
Because spirit is the source of truth.
Supposing now somebody
in India has been in jail
and he is released from jail, he doesn't know
how to settle in Indian society, perhaps.
So he comes to Germany with a
all the necessary dress of a saint
and people start following him.
Him, It's funny.
Nobody knows that
he is really the saint or not.
He talks big because in India everybody
reads all these books.
They can talk very big
and tell you lots of stories
and one can believe what he is talking.
But he is a thief
or he is a man who is
much less in spirituality than you are,
and he is just looting you,
using you, using your money
and calling himself a saint.
Till he is completely exposed
or discovered,
you follow that person.
But actually he is that or not
how will you find out?
Which is the way, which is the vehicle
by which you will know
whether this man is real or not?
Because you do not know
the absolute truth.
Whatever he tries to make up
you follow prey to that.
When you are a realized soul,
you put your hands towards such a person.
Immediately you'll start getting
terrible heat in the body,
or maybe a blister might come also.
How do I so become so
You become a barometer of absolute truth.
There are many people
who don't believe in God.
Like I went to Russia.
They said that: "Mother we believe in you."
There's thousands and thousands in Russia, I must say.
The awakening of Russians is tremendous.
They are very sensitive to spirituality.
They won't accept anybody false,
somehow, I don't know what.
And they asked me:
"Mother we believe that you are there.
You are something.
But how will you prove there is God?"
I said, all right.
You put your hands and ask question:
"Is there God or not?"
And they started feeling
the cool breeze in their hands
and tremendous coolness.
Then then said: "How are we to believe that
Christ was the Son of God?"
All right.  Again, you put up your hands.
Even if you have 10 small children
who are realized souls,
and if you tie up their eyes
and ask them:
"Now what's wrong with this gentleman?"
They will all raise the same finger.
Supposing they raise this finger or this finger.
You ask:
"Have you got some heart trouble?"
Immediately he'll say: "How do you know?"
The diagnosis itself
will be done by little children of 10 years.
It is fantastic! No doubt.
It is too fantastic that people can believe.
But you are fantastic!
Supposing I take a little box,
in an Indian Village and show them that
this is called as television
and you can see all kinds of films in it.
They'll say: "What, this box?"
We also all think we are just boxes.
But once you put to the mains
they will see how fantastic it is.
So I'm talking about
something which is making a science.
But the whole science is built in within us,
the whole knowledge
and it starts manifesting
and you are amazed
how you can do all these things.
So the second thing is
that you know the absolute truth.
Now, what happens
when we know the absolute truth?
We do not fall into any sects, into
any kind of we can say..
false type of enticements that we have.
Immediately we know this is false.
But another great advantage is
that when you know the absolute truth,
there is no question of fighting
because everybody sees the same truth,
knows the same truth.
I used to tell them about Freud
and they didn't like it very much at that
time, but now he's exposed.
People have said psychoanalysis is no,
[inaudible] no way to know.
So now, when he is now exposed
they are agreeing to it.
But so many would not sit in my program
because I said that Freud
has taken out some ion out of his head
and you have accepted it.
There's no reality in it.
So you know the reality
and all of you know the same reality.
So there's no question of fighting,
no question arguing
there are no dogmas,
there are no theories, nothing.
Everybody sees the same point of view.
So there will be no wars, there will be no quarrel,
nothing of the kind.
So this absolute truth
is only known when you become the spirit.
That's a fact.
Spirit is
the Universal Being.
Now, if spirit is the Universal Being,
you become a Universal Being.
That means that
you believe in all the religions,
and you believe in all the prophets,
all the incarnations,
and you see the essence
in every religion is the same,
and the indication is that first
you become a realized soul.
Christ has said you have to be born again.
Everybody has said the same thing.
But because of ignorance,
because of manipulation,
we all fight in the name of God.
When you become the Universal Being,
you forget
about races,
about nations,
false religions, false things
and you all become
absolutely congenial
with each other and such a rapport is established
between people.
See now what is the difference we have
between ourselves?
You cut the skin a little bit and you'll
find the same nerve, the same muscle,
the same bone in that part.
Whether it is in England
or it is in Australia, India or Russia.
No difference.
It's just skin deep.
And you smile the same way,
laugh the same way, cry the same way,
feel the same.
But still we are not conscious.
This is not in awareness that we are
all universal beings.
Now what is there to fight?
In the name of these superficial skin deep things?
So, what happens is this, that
a kind of a great brotherhood
starts emerging out.
We have programs in India
once a year, and about 3000 people come.
At least 3000 people.
They are from 55 countries.
You'd be amazed, they are from 55 countries.
I've never seen them quarreling,
fighting with any violence.
Even a football match,
you cannot see without a fight.
Here, such love, such understanding.
How they know each other,
how they understand each other,
how they love each other,
and how they intensely work
for the benevolence of others
is very, very remarkable.
When I first went to Russia,
You'd be amazed,
25 German Sahaja Yogis came in.
And these 25 German Sahaja Yogis
told me, when I asked them: "Why are you here?"
They said: "Mother, don't
you think it is our responsibility?"
I said: "No, why?
You didn't do anything wrong.
Your forefathers might have
done something wrong."
"No. It's our responsibility
because they were our forefathers."
And with great assiduity,
even when I left and sure, they were there
and they worked it out.
And today, I must say,
spiritually, apart from India,
Russia is the strongest country.
People are so sensitive.
I think we lost a lot of our energy
in the choices
and in the so-called freedom
and abandonment.
While their government might have been
wrong.
It might have been..
not so good.
But, the people are extremely simple,
and extremely loving,
very affectionate.
I was so surprised the way they were.
Thousands and thousands who got
their realization.
Here, I am very much surprised at our mayor here,
that he has recognized me.
The first time, I think any mayor
who has really recognized me in this way.
And I'm really, must say
Cincinnati must be some special place where
they have done it.
Of course, in Italy
there are some mayors in small, small
villages with tremendous respect for me.
But this kind of thing,
proclamation is such a surprise
to me, shows that in this place, Cincinnati,
there is an awareness
that we need transformation.
With transformation
not only your physical, mental,
emotional problems are solved, but
material problems are solved.
Agriculture improves such a lot
Because this vibrated
things like water and all that,
when you give it
to the crops
we have seen, it has grown ten times.
We have some doctors of agriculture
who have experimented with it
and have been trying to publish a book
about it.
Not only agriculture,
but so many other things, like,
we can say the ecological problem you have.
It's the trees which are dying
with acid rain, have been saved.
And they are emitting very good air
to counterbalance the ecological problem.
So many things can be done
once you have this force working in it.
It is there. It's your own,
for which you don't have to pay.
Just you have to have desire to have it.
It's so simple as that.
But I don't know why
one lady told me
in the plane, she was American,
that: "We have had so many hoaxes
that Mother, maybe they don't believe you."
But no, I was the first to come here.
But I was surprised
the way they said to me that:
"We won't believe you
unless until you take money."
So what's that?
Another thing they said:
"How can it be so easy?"
But if it is so, supposedly,
I mean, I'm saying that just, to believe,
there is a diamond kept here.
I say it's a real diamond.
Won't you all rush to take it?
But if I'm saying it is so easy,
on this point, they wouldn't accept.
You shouldn't eat food like this but
should go around and eat like that.
Otherwise, cannot.
They believe you must suffer
before you get spirituality.
I said you have suffered enough now,
believe me.
You don't have to suffer.
They think you have to go to Himalayas
and stand on your head,
and starve yourself on Gobi Desert,
and get Nirvana. In anyway you die.
So you call it death is Nirvana.
You can do it.
All these kind of ideas they gave me, I just,
I didn't want to talk to them.
And all sorts of false people invaded.
Not only Indians, Americans, Portuguese.
All sorts of people invaded
and they succumbed to them.
I didn't come to America for nine years
for the same reason.
I thought know their ideas about truth are so funny,
that you have to
go to Himalayas and
you must do this and do that,
that I will never be able to really work it out.
After nine years, Sahaja Yogis told me:
"Now, mother, it's changing, you better come."
So I came and
Cincinnati, I was here three years back.
I am sorry, I should have come earlier,
but I've been very busy.
South America is also very well
in spirituality.
They are very faithful, simple people.
I don't say that complicated
people don't get realization.
They do. All of them.
But complicated people
have to devote little more time
to get this connection alright.
Like you see any complicated machinery.
If it goes out of order,
you have to pay more attention to it.
In the same way, once you get your realization,
you have to come to the collective.
Collective means that everybody is there
who knows all about Sahaja Yoga
and you must master it.
That also is free.
Absolutely free.
You don't have to pay for it.
You should have all the knowledge
about the subtle system
and you should get
all the powers that are within you,
which can manifest.
This is only my desire
and for which
I am running day and night
all over the world.
As they said, it's true that on one side,
I have a very good family
and a very good husband.
I have grandchildren.
And I myself, 70 years of age.
So can you imagine, I'm still traveling
and doing all this work?
Because even my family thinks that
it's very important
that transformation must take place
so that there's a complete emancipation
of human beings.
And people should transform
to transform the whole world.
And this is a very special time.
I hope people from Cincinnati
will respond to it
and will get their self-realization.
We'll take about 10 to 15 minutes for that.
And..
those, who do not want
to have their self-realization
should leave the house,
should leave the place.
Because I cannot force.
It's your freedom
to get your realization.
If you don't want it, you are free.
If you want to enter into
the kingdom of God, you can.
If you don't want, you cannot.
Because, this is the work of divine love.
Nothing can be forced.
And this compassion
that is flowing
as the divine love
will not force anything on you.
It respects your freedom.
So I have to humbly request you,
those who do not want to have realization
should leave the place
and should not, in any way,
disturb others who want to have it.
But definitely I would request you
not to disturb when we are in the process
of our meditation
which takes about ten minutes, only.
As I told you, it's a collective happening
and you have to
come to the collective
to work it out and to know about it.
In that,
you will be amazed how you will grow fast,
and you will understand each and everything.
I'm sure you must be having
lots of questions, also, in your mind.
As I'm here only for one day,
I would say
that you should write your questions
and send them over,
and I'll try to answer them.
Tomorrow I am going away to Canada.
And I'll be back again after one year.
I promise I will be here
for a longer period next time.
Now there are three conditions
which I must tell you,
which are very simple.
The first condition is
that you have to be absolutely confident
that you all are going to get
your self-realization tonight.
Absolutely confident.
Don't doubt yourself.
So the second one follows
that you should not
feel guilty at all at this moment, here.
After all, you are human beings,
you are not gods.
And human beings can only make mistakes,
isn't it?
And this all pervading power
about which I am talking to you,
which is going to work out
your self-realization,
is the ocean of forgiveness.
And very powerful ocean of forgiveness.
And whatever mistakes
you might have committed,
it can dissolve everything.
So don't feel guilty at all.
And this idea of being sinner
and all that, just forget it.
If you are the seeker of truth,
it's your right to get your
your guide, your union with the divine.
It's your right.
"Sahaja" - "Saha" means with you is born,
"Ja" is born.
This right to get this union.
So please, don't feel guilty.
I must tell you very frankly,
when you feel guilty,
the center on the left side here, catches.
As a result you might get spondylitis,
you might get angina.
Also, you are
the system, the organs might become lethargic.
So no use feeling guilty.
What's the use?
If you have made mistakes
You think you've made really mistake,
just face it and finish it off.
But don't carry it all here.
But it has just become a fashion item.
One lady told me:
"I feel very guilty for Afghanistan."
I said: "What, are you Afghani?" -No.
"Then, are you Russian?" -No.
"Then why are you feeling?" -I'm just feeling.
So please, in short,
you have to be placed
very pleasantly towards yourself.
Very very pleasantly.
Then..
the third one is a very, very simple condition
is that, you have to forgive
everyone without thinking about it.